docs/rst/tutorials/tools/shapes_demo/shapes_demo.rst, before:

.. _tutorials_tools_shapes_demo:

ROS 2 Shapes Demo Tutorials
===========================

.. contents::
    :depth: 2
    :local:
    :backlinks: none

Background
----------

Vulcanexus integrates `ROS 2 Shapes Demo <https://docs.vulcanexus.org/en/latest/rst/introduction/tools/shapes_demo.html/>`_, which is a useful application for showing the capabilities of `eProsima Fast DDS <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/>`_ or as a proof of interoperability with other RTPS-compliant implementations.

Prerequisites
-------------

It is required to have previously installed Vulcanexus using one of the following installation methods:

* :ref:`linux_binary_installation`
* :ref:`linux_source_installation`
* :ref:`docker_installation`

Ensure that the Vulcanexus installation includes Vulcanexus Tools (either ``vulcanexus-humble-desktop``, ``vulcanexus-humble-tools``, or ``vulcanexus-humble-base``).

Run Vulcanexus Docker image with:

.. code-block:: bash

    xhost local:root
    docker run \
        -it \
        --privileged \
        -e DISPLAY=$DISPLAY \
        -v /tmp/.X11-unix:/tmp/.X11-unix \
        ubuntu-vulcanexus:humble-desktop

To run more than one session within the same container, *Vulcanexus* installation must be sourced.
Given a running container, you can open another session by:

.. code-block:: bash

    docker exec -it <running-container-id> bash

Then, within the container, source the *Vulcanexus* installation with:

.. code-block:: bash

    source /opt/vulcanexus/humble/setup.bash

Launch ROS 2 Shapes Demo
------------------------

Initiate *ROS 2 Shapes Demo* running the following command:

.. code-block:: bash

    shapesdemo

Tutorials
---------

This tutorials present step-by-step instructions to test the funcionality provided by ROS 2 Shapes demo.

Discovery and basic connectivity
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In *Fast DDS*, the discovery task is automatic.
*Fast DDS* performs the task of finding the relevant information and distributing it to its destination.
It means that new nodes are automatically discovered by any other in the network.
Please refer to the
`Fast DDS Discovery Documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/discovery/discovery.html>`_
for more information on the various *Fast DDS* discovery mechanisms.

In this test, three Publishers and three Subscribers are launched.
At the end, two additional squares will be displayed in each window, reflecting the movements of the original square in
real time.
That is, subscribers subscribing to the "Square" topics are matched with the publishers of the other instances.

Step-by-step example implementation
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

First, three publishers must be created.

1. Create a red square publisher:

   - Start ROS 2 Shapes Demo (this instance will be referred to as *Instance1*).
   - Click on Publish.
   - Select SQUARE option for Shape and RED for Color.

2. Create a blue square publisher:

   - Start ROS 2 Shapes Demo (this instance will be referred to as *Instance2*).
   - Click on Publish.
   - Select SQUARE option for Shape and BLUE for Color.

3. Create a black square publisher:

   - Start ROS 2 Shapes Demo (this instance will be referred to as *Instance3*).
   - Click on Publish.
   - Select SQUARE option for Shape and BLACK for Color.

The current setting should be similar to that shown in the figure below.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/tools/shapes_demo/discovery_1.png
    :align: center

Then, three subscribers must be created.

1. Click Subscribe on *Instance1*.

   - Select SQUARE option for Shape.
   - Change the History field from 6 to 1.

2. Click Subscribe on *Instance2*.

   - Select SQUARE option for Shape.
   - Change the History field from 6 to 1.

3. Click Subscribe on *Instance3*.

   - Select SQUARE option for Shape.
   - Change the History field from 6 to 1.

The ROS 2 Shapes Demo windows should look similar to the following image.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/tools/shapes_demo/discovery_2.png
    :align: center

History and Durability
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A publisher can send messages throughout a Topic even if there are no DataReaders on the network.
Moreover, a DataReader that joins to the Topic after some data has been written could be interested in accessing that
information.
The durability defines how the system will behave regarding those samples that existed on the Topic before the
subscriber joins.
Please refer to
`Fast DDS DurabilityQosPolicy Documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/core/policy/standardQosPolicies.html#durabilityqospolicy>`_
for more information on Durability QoS.

In the following example, the publishers' history is set to ``KEEP_LAST``, and
there are two options for the durability configuration which are ``VOLATILE`` and ``TRANSIENT_LOCAL``.
If ``VOLATILE`` is selected, the previous data samples will not be sent.
However, if ``TRANSIENT_LOCAL`` is selected, the :math:`n^{th}` previous data samples will be sent to the late-joining
subscriber.

In this example, one hundred red squares will be displayed in *Instance2* and *Instance3*, reflecting the movements of
the red square of the publisher from *Instance1*.
The leading square indicates the current position of the published square.

Step-by-step example implementation
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

First, three instances are launched and a publisher is created in each of them:

1 - Create a red square publisher:

   - Start ROS 2 Shapes Demo (this instance will be referred to as *Instance1*).
   - Click on Publish.
   - Select SQUARE option for Shape and RED for Color.
   - Change the History field from 6 to 100.
   - Select TRANSIENT_LOCAL.

2 - Create an orange square publisher:

   - Start ROS 2 Shapes Demo (this instance will be referred to as *Instance2*).
   - Click on Publish.
   - Select SQUARE option for Shape and ORANGE for Color.
   - Change the History field from 6 to 100.
   - Select TRANSIENT_LOCAL.

3 - Create a black square publisher:

   - Start ROS 2 Shapes Demo (this instance will be referred to as *Instance3*).
   - Click on Publish.
   - Select SQUARE option for Shape and BLACK for Color.
   - Change the History field from 6 to 100.
   - Select TRANSIENT_LOCAL.

The ROS 2 Shapes Demo environment should look similar to the following figure.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/tools/shapes_demo/history_durability_1.png
    :align: center

Then, subscriber in each instance is created.

4. Click Subscribe on *Instance1*.

   - Select SQUARE option for Shape.
   - Change the History field from 6 to 100.

5. Click Subscribe on *Instance2*.

   - Select SQUARE option for Shape.
   - Change the History field from 6 to 100.

6. Click Subscribe on *Instance3*.

   - Select SQUARE option for Shape.
   - Change the History field from 6 to 100.

The ROS 2 Shapes Demo environment should look similar to the following figure.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/tools/shapes_demo/history_durability_2.png
    :align: center

Liveliness
^^^^^^^^^^

The Liveliness QoS can be used to ensure whether specific entities are alive or not.
There are three values to specify the liveliness' kind: ``AUTOMATIC``, ``MANUAL_BY_PARTICIPANT`` or ``MANUAL_BY_TOPIC``
liveliness.
If any of the first two is selected, a value for the lease duration and announcement period can be set.
However, if ``MANUAL_BY_TOPIC`` is selected, only the lease duration can be configured, as the announcement period is
not used with this configuration.
With the ``AUTOMATIC`` liveliness kind, the service takes the responsibility for renewing the timer associated to the
lease duration, and as long as the remote participant keeps running and remains connected, all the entities within that
participant will be considered alive.
The other two kinds (``MANUAL_BY_PARTICIPANT`` and ``MANUAL_BY_TOPIC``) need a periodic assertion to consider the remote
participants as alive.
Please refer to
`Fast DDS LivelinessQosPolicy Documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/core/policy/standardQosPolicies.html#livelinessqospolicy>`_
for more information on Liveliness QoS.

In this test, a publisher and subscriber using ``AUTOMATIC`` liveliness will be created, and a lease duration value
higher than the write rate of the publisher will be set.

Step-by-step example implementation
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

First, launch two instances and create a publisher and a subscriber:

1. Create a red square publisher:

   - Start ROS 2 Shapes Demo. (We will refer to this instance as Instance1)
   - Click on Publish.
   - Select SQUARE option for Shape and RED for Color.
   - Select ``AUTOMATIC`` for liveliness kind.
   - Set Lease Duration to 150. (The default write rate is 75 ms)

2. Create a square subscriber:

   - Start ROS 2 Shapes Demo. (We will refer to this instance as Instance2)
   - Click on Subscribe.
   - Select SQUARE option for Shape.
   - Select ``AUTOMATIC`` for liveliness kind.
   - Set a value for the Lease Duration higher or equal to the one stated for the publisher.
     (If the value of subscriber lease duration is lower the entities do not match)

.. note::
    Add figure.

The *Output Tab* of Instance2 shows that the subscriber has recovered the liveliness once it
matches with the publisher.

Then, kill the process corresponding to the publisher (Instance1).
As a result, the subscriber reported that liveliness was lost, as the publisher did not terminate cleanly.

.. note::
    Add figure.

Content Based Filter
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In *Fast DDS*, the data available to the subscriber can be restricted to control network and CPU usage.
The Content Based Filter can be checked when a new subscriber is deployed.
This filter draws a shaded region in the instance windows.
Only the samples that are covered by the shade will be available to the subscriber.
This region can be resized and moved dynamically.

In this test, two Publishers and two subscriber will be created, one of the latter with Content Based.

Step-by-step example implementation
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

First, you have to launch two instances and create a Publisher in each of them:

1. Create a red square publisher:

   - Start ROS 2 Shapes Demo (this instance will be referred to as *Instance1*).
   - Click on Publish.
   - Select SQUARE option for Shape and RED for Color.
   - Change the History field from 6 to 1.

2. Create an orange circle publisher:

   - Start ROS 2 Shapes Demo (this instance will be referred to as *Instance2*).
   - Click on Publish.
   - Select CIRCLE option for Shape and ORANGE for Color.
   - Change the History field from 6 to 1.

Your windows should look similar to the following image.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/tools/shapes_demo/content_1.png
    :align: center

Then, create two subscribers:

3. Create a circle subscriber:

   - Start ROS 2 Shapes Demo (this instance will be referred to as *Instance3*).
   - Click on Subscribe.
   - Select CIRCLE option for Shape.
   - Change the History field from 6 to 1.
   - Check Content Based.

4. Create a square subscriber:

   - Click on Subscribe in Instance3.
   - Select SQUARE option for Shape.
   - Change the History field from 6 to 1.

In the following figure, a shaded rectangle in Instance3 is shown.
This is the filter for the samples of the Circle Shape.
If the circle is out of the rectangle, it is not available for the subscriber.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/tools/shapes_demo/content_2.png
    :align: center

However, if the instance is in the rectangle, it is available for the subscriber..

.. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/tools/shapes_demo/content_3.png
    :align: center

The rectangle is configurable, i.e. it can be resized and moved dynamically.
The following images show examples of the content filter.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/tools/shapes_demo/content_4.png
    :align: center

Next Steps
----------

Visit `ROS 2 Shapes Demo <https://docs.vulcanexus.org/en/latest/rst/introduction/tools/shapes_demo.html>`_ for more information on how to use this application.

Commit message:

Add liveliness figures
Signed-off-by: Irene Bandera <irenebandera@eprosima.com>

docs/rst/tutorials/tools/shapes_demo/shapes_demo.rst, after:

.. _tutorials_tools_shapes_demo:

Functionalities of ROS 2 Shapes Demo
====================================

.. contents::
    :depth: 2
    :local:
    :backlinks: none

Background
----------

Vulcanexus integrates `ROS 2 Shapes Demo <https://docs.vulcanexus.org/en/latest/rst/introduction/tools/shapes_demo.html/>`_, which is a useful application for showing the capabilities of `eProsima Fast DDS <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/>`_ or as a proof of interoperability with other RTPS-compliant implementations.

Prerequisites
-------------

It is required to have previously installed Vulcanexus using one of the following installation methods:

* :ref:`linux_binary_installation`
* :ref:`linux_source_installation`
* :ref:`docker_installation`

Ensure that the Vulcanexus installation includes Vulcanexus Tools (either ``vulcanexus-humble-desktop``, ``vulcanexus-humble-tools``, or ``vulcanexus-humble-base``).

Run Vulcanexus Docker image with:

.. code-block:: bash

    xhost local:root
    docker run \
        -it \
        --privileged \
        -e DISPLAY=$DISPLAY \
        -v /tmp/.X11-unix:/tmp/.X11-unix \
        ubuntu-vulcanexus:humble-desktop

To run more than one session within the same container, *Vulcanexus* installation must be sourced.
Given a running container, you can open another session by:

.. code-block:: bash

    docker exec -it <running-container-id> bash

Then, within the container, source the *Vulcanexus* installation with:

.. code-block:: bash

    source /opt/vulcanexus/humble/setup.bash

Launch ROS 2 Shapes Demo
------------------------

Initiate *ROS 2 Shapes Demo* running the following command:

.. code-block:: bash

    shapesdemo

Tutorials
---------

This tutorials present step-by-step instructions to test the functionalities provided by ROS 2 Shapes demo.

Discovery and basic connectivity
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In *Fast DDS*, the discovery task is automatic.
*Fast DDS* performs the task of finding the relevant information and distributing it to its destination.
It means that new nodes are automatically discovered by any other in the network.
Please refer to the
`Fast DDS Discovery Documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/discovery/discovery.html>`_
for more information on the various *Fast DDS* discovery mechanisms.

In this test, three Publishers and three Subscribers are launched.
At the end, two additional squares will be displayed in each window, reflecting the movements of the original square in
real time.
That is, subscribers subscribing to the "Square" topics are matched with the publishers of the other instances.

Step-by-step example implementation
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

First, three publishers must be created.

1. Create a red square publisher:

   - Start ROS 2 Shapes Demo (this instance will be referred to as *Instance1*).
   - Click on Publish.
   - Select SQUARE option for Shape and RED for Color.

2. Create a blue square publisher:

   - Start ROS 2 Shapes Demo (this instance will be referred to as *Instance2*).
   - Click on Publish.
   - Select SQUARE option for Shape and BLUE for Color.

3. Create a black square publisher:

   - Start ROS 2 Shapes Demo (this instance will be referred to as *Instance3*).
   - Click on Publish.
   - Select SQUARE option for Shape and BLACK for Color.

The current setting should be similar to that shown in the figure below.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/tools/shapes_demo/discovery_1.png
    :align: center

Then, three subscribers must be created.

1. Click Subscribe on *Instance1*.

   - Select SQUARE option for Shape.
   - Change the History field from 6 to 1.

2. Click Subscribe on *Instance2*.

   - Select SQUARE option for Shape.
   - Change the History field from 6 to 1.

3. Click Subscribe on *Instance3*.

   - Select SQUARE option for Shape.
   - Change the History field from 6 to 1.

The ROS 2 Shapes Demo windows should look similar to the following image.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/tools/shapes_demo/discovery_2.png
    :align: center

History and Durability
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A publisher can send messages throughout a Topic even if there are no DataReaders on the network.
Moreover, a DataReader that joins to the Topic after some data has been written could be interested in accessing that
information.
The durability defines how the system will behave regarding those samples that existed on the Topic before the
subscriber joins.
Please refer to
`Fast DDS DurabilityQosPolicy Documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/core/policy/standardQosPolicies.html#durabilityqospolicy>`_
for more information on Durability QoS.

In the following example, the publishers' history is set to ``KEEP_LAST``, and
there are two options for the durability configuration which are ``VOLATILE`` and ``TRANSIENT_LOCAL``.
If ``VOLATILE`` is selected, the previous data samples will not be sent.
However, if ``TRANSIENT_LOCAL`` is selected, the :math:`n^{th}` previous data samples will be sent to the late-joining
subscriber.

In this example, one hundred red squares will be displayed in *Instance2* and *Instance3*, reflecting the movements of
the red square of the publisher from *Instance1*.
The leading square indicates the current position of the published square.

Step-by-step example implementation
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

First, three instances are launched and a publisher is created in each of them:

1 - Create a red square publisher:

   - Start ROS 2 Shapes Demo (this instance will be referred to as *Instance1*).
   - Click on Publish.
   - Select SQUARE option for Shape and RED for Color.
   - Change the History field from 6 to 100.
   - Select TRANSIENT_LOCAL.

2 - Create an orange square publisher:

   - Start ROS 2 Shapes Demo (this instance will be referred to as *Instance2*).
   - Click on Publish.
   - Select SQUARE option for Shape and ORANGE for Color.
   - Change the History field from 6 to 100.
   - Select TRANSIENT_LOCAL.

3 - Create a black square publisher:

   - Start ROS 2 Shapes Demo (this instance will be referred to as *Instance3*).
   - Click on Publish.
   - Select SQUARE option for Shape and BLACK for Color.
   - Change the History field from 6 to 100.
   - Select TRANSIENT_LOCAL.

The ROS 2 Shapes Demo environment should look similar to the following figure.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/tools/shapes_demo/history_durability_1.png
    :align: center

Then, subscriber in each instance is created.

4. Click Subscribe on *Instance1*.

   - Select SQUARE option for Shape.
   - Change the History field from 6 to 100.

5. Click Subscribe on *Instance2*.

   - Select SQUARE option for Shape.
   - Change the History field from 6 to 100.

6. Click Subscribe on *Instance3*.

   - Select SQUARE option for Shape.
   - Change the History field from 6 to 100.

The ROS 2 Shapes Demo environment should look similar to the following figure.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/tools/shapes_demo/history_durability_2.png
    :align: center

Liveliness
^^^^^^^^^^

The Liveliness QoS can be used to ensure whether specific entities are alive or not.
There are three values to specify the liveliness' kind: ``AUTOMATIC``, ``MANUAL_BY_PARTICIPANT`` or ``MANUAL_BY_TOPIC``
liveliness.
If any of the first two is selected, a value for the lease duration and announcement period can be set.
However, if ``MANUAL_BY_TOPIC`` is selected, only the lease duration can be configured, as the announcement period is
not used with this configuration.
With the ``AUTOMATIC`` liveliness kind, the service takes the responsibility for renewing the timer associated to the
lease duration, and as long as the remote participant keeps running and remains connected, all the entities within that
participant will be considered alive.
The other two kinds (``MANUAL_BY_PARTICIPANT`` and ``MANUAL_BY_TOPIC``) need a periodic assertion to consider the remote
participants as alive.
Please refer to
`Fast DDS LivelinessQosPolicy Documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/core/policy/standardQosPolicies.html#livelinessqospolicy>`_
for more information on Liveliness QoS.

In this test, a publisher and subscriber using ``AUTOMATIC`` liveliness will be created, and a lease duration value
higher than the write rate of the publisher will be set.

Step-by-step example implementation
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

First, launch two instances and create a publisher and a subscriber:

1. Create a red square publisher:

   - Start ROS 2 Shapes Demo. (We will refer to this instance as Instance1)
   - Click on Publish.
   - Select SQUARE option for Shape and RED for Color.
   - Select ``AUTOMATIC`` for liveliness kind.
   - Set Lease Duration to 150. (The default write rate is 75 ms)
   - Set Announcement Period to 140.

2. Create a square subscriber:

   - Start ROS 2 Shapes Demo. (We will refer to this instance as Instance2)
   - Click on Subscribe.
   - Select SQUARE option for Shape.
   - Select ``AUTOMATIC`` for liveliness kind.
   - Set a value for the Lease Duration higher or equal to the one stated for the publisher.
     (If the value of subscriber lease duration is lower the entities do not match)

.. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/tools/shapes_demo/liveliness_1.png
    :align: center

The *Output Tab* of Instance2 shows that the subscriber has recovered the liveliness once it
matches with the publisher.

Then, kill the process corresponding to the publisher (Instance1).
As a result, the subscriber reported that liveliness was lost, as the publisher did not terminate cleanly.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/tools/shapes_demo/liveliness_2.png
    :align: center

Content Based Filter
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In *Fast DDS*, the data available to the subscriber can be restricted to control network and CPU usage.
The Content Based Filter can be checked when a new subscriber is deployed.
This filter draws a shaded region in the instance windows.
Only the samples that are covered by the shade will be available to the subscriber.
This region can be resized and moved dynamically.

In this test, two Publishers and two subscriber will be created, one of the latter with Content Based.

Step-by-step example implementation
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

First, you have to launch two instances and create a Publisher in each of them:

1. Create a red square publisher:

   - Start ROS 2 Shapes Demo (this instance will be referred to as *Instance1*).
   - Click on Publish.
   - Select SQUARE option for Shape and RED for Color.
   - Change the History field from 6 to 1.

2. Create an orange circle publisher:

   - Start ROS 2 Shapes Demo (this instance will be referred to as *Instance2*).
   - Click on Publish.
   - Select CIRCLE option for Shape and ORANGE for Color.
   - Change the History field from 6 to 1.

Your windows should look similar to the following image.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/tools/shapes_demo/content_1.png
    :align: center

Then, create two subscribers:

3. Create a circle subscriber:

   - Start ROS 2 Shapes Demo (this instance will be referred to as *Instance3*).
   - Click on Subscribe.
   - Select CIRCLE option for Shape.
   - Change the History field from 6 to 1.
   - Check Content Based.

4. Create a square subscriber:

   - Click on Subscribe in Instance3.
   - Select SQUARE option for Shape.
   - Change the History field from 6 to 1.

In the following figure, a shaded rectangle in Instance3 is shown.
This is the filter for the samples of the Circle Shape.
If the circle is out of the rectangle, it is not available for the subscriber.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/tools/shapes_demo/content_2.png
    :align: center

However, if the instance is in the rectangle, it is available for the subscriber..

.. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/tools/shapes_demo/content_3.png
    :align: center

The rectangle is configurable, i.e. it can be resized and moved dynamically.
The following images show examples of the content filter.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/tools/shapes_demo/content_4.png
    :align: center

Next Steps
----------

Visit `ROS 2 Shapes Demo <https://docs.vulcanexus.org/en/latest/rst/introduction/tools/shapes_demo.html>`_ for more information on how to use this application.
