docs/rst/tutorials/cloud/cloud_tutorials.rst, before:

.. _tutorials_cloud_cloud_tutorials:

Vulcanexus Cloud Tutorials
==========================

This tutorials aims to show the user how to recreate a robot deployment in a distributed network with the capability of monitoring, control and tracking through the Cloud.
This way, a series of tutorials are presented that intend to build a complex final architecture step by step, explaining in detail the different steps of the process and the configuration of the different Vulcanexus nodes and WAN communication enabling components.

The following are the tutorials that make up this course on communication in distributed scenarios using the Vulcanexus framework.


.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1

    change_domain/change_domain
    change_domain_discovery_server/change_domain_discovery_server
    debug_ros2_router/debug_ros2_router
    kubernetes/kubernetes
    wan_edge_cloud/wan_edge_cloud
    wan_edge_cloud_tls/wan_edge_cloud_tls
    edge_edge_repeater_cloud/edge_edge_repeater_cloud
    microservices_cloud/microservices_cloud

Commit message:

DDS Router configuration via XML profiles tutorial (#150)
* Run container on the local host

Signed-off-by: tempate <danieldiaz@eprosima.com>

* Update the YAML conf. version from v3.0 to v3.1

Signed-off-by: tempate <danieldiaz@eprosima.com>

* Add an XML Participant Configuration tutorial

Signed-off-by: tempate <danieldiaz@eprosima.com>

* Fix misspells in the tutorials

Signed-off-by: tempate <danieldiaz@eprosima.com>

* Fix misspells in the XML tutorial

Signed-off-by: tempate <danieldiaz@eprosima.com>

* Apply the changes suggested in the review

Signed-off-by: tempate <danieldiaz@eprosima.com>

* Apply the changes suggested in the review

Signed-off-by: tempate <danieldiaz@eprosima.com>

---------

Signed-off-by: tempate <danieldiaz@eprosima.com>

docs/rst/tutorials/cloud/cloud_tutorials.rst, after:

.. _tutorials_cloud_cloud_tutorials:

Vulcanexus Cloud Tutorials
==========================

These tutorials aim to show the user how to recreate a robot deployment in a distributed network with the capability of monitoring, controlling, and tracking through the Cloud.
This way, a series of tutorials are presented that intend to build a complex final architecture step by step, explaining in detail the different steps of the process and the configuration of the different Vulcanexus nodes and WAN communication enabling components.

The following are the tutorials that make up this course on communication in distributed scenarios using the Vulcanexus framework.


.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1

    change_domain/change_domain
    change_domain_discovery_server/change_domain_discovery_server
    debug_ros2_router/debug_ros2_router
    kubernetes/kubernetes
    wan_edge_cloud/wan_edge_cloud
    wan_edge_cloud_tls/wan_edge_cloud_tls
    edge_edge_repeater_cloud/edge_edge_repeater_cloud
    microservices_cloud/microservices_cloud
    router_conf_via_xml_profiles/router_conf_via_xml_profiles
