docs/rst/introduction/tools/shapes_demo.rst, before:

.. _vulcanexus_shapes_demo:

ROS 2 Shapes Demo
=================

*ROS 2 Shapes Demo* is an application in which Publishers and Subscribers are shapes of different colors and sizes moving on a board.
Each shape refers to its own topic: Square, Triangle or Circle.
A single instance of the *ROS 2 Shapes Demo* can publish on or subscribe to several topics at a time.

It demonstrates the capabilities of eProsima Fast DDS or as a proof of interoperability with other DDS-compliant implementations.

.. raw:: html

    <video width=100% height=auto autoplay loop controls>
        <source src="../../../_static/interoperability.mp4">
        Your browser does not support the video tag.
    </video>
    <br></br>

Using ROS 2 Shapes Demo
--------------------------

After the executable is launched, a window similar to the one presented in the following image should be displayed.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/intro/tools/shapes_demo/mainWindow.png
   :alt: Main Window
   :align: center


Publishing a Topic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Publish button allow the users to define the Shape (topic) and Quality of Service (QoS) for their publication.
The following image shows an example of the Publication menu.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/intro/tools/shapes_demo/publish.png
   :scale: 100 %
   :alt: Publish Window
   :align: center

There are multiple parameters that the user can define in this menu:

*   **Shape**: This parameter defines the topic where the publication is going to occur.
    Three different shapes can be published: ``Square``, ``Circle`` and ``Triangle`` (see `Fast DDS Topic Documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/topic/typeSupport/typeSupport.html#data-types-with-a-key>`_).
*   **Color**: The user can define the color of the shape.
*   **Size**: This parameter allows to control the size of the shape.
    The size can vary between ``1`` and ``99``.
*   **Partition**: The user can select different partitions to differentiate groups of publishers and subscribers.
    The user can select between four partitions (``A``, ``B``, ``C`` and ``D``).
    Additionally the user can select the ``*`` partition, that will be matched against all other partitions (see `Fast DDS Partitions Documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/domain/domainParticipant/partition.html?#partitions>`_).

    .. note::

        Using the wildcard (``*``) partition is not the same as not using any partition.
        A publisher that uses the wildcard partition will not be matched with a subscriber that do not defines any partitions.

*   **Reliable**: The user can select to disable the ``Reliable`` check-box to use a ``Best-Effort`` publisher (see `Fast DDS ReliabilityQosPolicy Documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/core/policy/standardQosPolicies.html#reliabilityqospolicy>`_).
*   **History and Durability**: The publishers's History is set to ``KEEP_LAST``.
    The user can select the number of samples that the publisher is going to save and whether this History is going to be ``VOLATILE`` or ``TRANSIENT_LOCAL``.
    The latter will send that last stored values to subscribers joining after the publisher has been created (see `Fast DDS DurabilityQosPolicy Documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/core/policy/standardQosPolicies.html#durabilityqospolicy>`_).
*   **Liveliness**: The user can select the Liveliness QoS of the publisher from three different values: ``AUTOMATIC``, ``MANUAL_BY_PARTICIPANT`` and ``MANUAL_BY_TOPIC``.
    The Lease Duration value and Announcement Period can also be configured.
    The latter only applies if Liveliness is set to ``AUTOMATIC`` or ``MANUAL_BY_PARTICIPANT`` (see `Fast DDS LivelinessQosPolicy Documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/core/policy/standardQosPolicies.html#livelinessqospolicy>`_).
*   **Ownership**: The Ownership QoS determines whether the key (color) of a Topic (Shape) is owned by a single publisher.
    If the selected ownership is ``EXCLUSIVE`` the publisher will use the Ownership strength value as the strength of its publication.
    Only the publisher with the highest strength can publish in the same Topic with the same Key (see `Fast DDS OwnershipQosPolicy Documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/core/policy/standardQosPolicies.html#ownershipqospolicy>`_).
*   **Deadline**: The Deadline QoS determines the maximum expected amount of time between samples.
    When the deadline is missed the application will be notified and a message will be printed on the console (see `Fast DDS DeadlineQosPolicy Documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/core/policy/standardQosPolicies.html#deadlineqospolicy>`_).
*   **Lifespan**: The Lifespan QoS determines the duration while the sample is still valid.
    When a sample's lifespan expires, it will be removed from publisher and subscriber histories.
    (see `Fast DDS LifespanQosPolicy Documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/core/policy/standardQosPolicies.html#lifespanqospolicy>`_).

.. note::

    Using Lifespan QoS will not have any visual effect.

Subscribing to a Topic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When the Subscriber button is pressed, a new window appear to allow the user to define the Shape (topic) and Quality of Service for its subscription.
The following image shows an example of the Subscribe menu.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/intro/tools/shapes_demo/subscribe.png
   :alt: Subscribe Window
   :align: center

This menu is highly similar to the Publication menu but the user cannot change the color and size of the Shape, and it has additional elements:

*   **Liveliness**: This QoS policy is applied in the same way as in the publisher except for the Announcement Period, which does not apply for the Subscriber (see `Fast DDS LivelinessQosPolicy Documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/core/policy/standardQosPolicies.html#livelinessqospolicy>`_).
*   **Time Based Filter**: This value can be used by the user to specify the minimum amount of time (in milliseconds) that the subscriber wants between updates (see `Fast DDS TimeBasedFilterQosPolicy Documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/core/policy/standardQosPolicies.html#timebasedfilterqospolicy>`_).
*   **Content Based Filter**: This filter draws a rectangle in the instances window.
    Only the shapes that are included in this rectangle are accepted while the rest of them are ignored.
    The user can dynamically resize and move this content filter.

.. note::

    Using Lifespan QoS will not have any visual effect.

Participant configuration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
The *ROS 2 Shapes Demo* application allows the user to define Participant policies.
To see the Options window, please go to Options->Participant Configuration in the main bar.
The following image shows the Options Menu.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/intro/tools/shapes_demo/participant.png
   :scale: 75 %
   :alt: Options Window
   :align: center

-   **Transport Protocol**:  You can select between `UDP <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/transport/tcp/tcp.html#transport-tcp-tcp>`_ protocol, `TCP <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/transport/shared_memory/shared_memory.html#transport-sharedmemory-sharedmemory>`_ LAN Server, TCP WAN Server or TCP Client, and `Shared Memory <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/transport/shared_memory/shared_memory.html#transport-sharedmemory-sharedmemory>`_ transport. In case no transport has been activated, *Fast DDS* default transports will be used (UDP + SHM) (see `Fast DDS Transports Documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/transport/transport.html>`_).

-   **Same host delivery**:  *Fast DDS* has some features that allow Participants running in the same host or process
    to share resources in order to improve the communication:

    - **Intraprocess**: Allow using Intraprocess delivery when both Endpoints are running in the same process (see `Fast DDS Intraprocess Documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/transport/intraprocess.html#intraprocess-delivery>`_).

    - **Data Sharing**: Allow using Data Sharing delivery when both Endpoints are running in the same host (see `Fast DDS Data Sharing Documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/transport/datasharing.html#datasharing-delivery>`_).

-   **Domain**: The user can select different Domain IDs.
    Shapes Demo instances using different Domain IDs will not communicate.
    To modify the Domain ID the user needs to stop the participant (thus removing all existing publishers and subscribers) and start a new one with the new Domain ID (see `Fast DDS Domain Documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/domain/domain.html>`_).

-   **Statistics**: The user can activate *Fast DDS Statistics module* so different instrumentation data could be
    collected and analyzed by the *Fast DDS Statistics Backend*, or be represented by *Fast DDS Monitor*.
    This module requires to have compiled *Fast DDS* with Statistics Module ON (see `Fast DDS Statistics Module Documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/statistics/statistics.html>`_).

In case that the Participant is already running, it should be stopped in order to change its configuration.
This will drop every endpoint already created.

Endpoints and Output tabs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A table including all created endpoints is also provided.
An example of this legend is shown in the following figure.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/intro/tools/shapes_demo/table1.png
   :alt: Endpoints
   :align: center

This table can be used to remove endpoints.
Two methods are provided:

- Right click in an endpoint: An option to remove the endpoint is shown.
- Pressing the delete button when the endpoint is selected.

The output tab shows the output log messages.
An example of the output tab is shown in the figure below.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/intro/tools/shapes_demo/table2.png
   :alt: Outputs
   :align: center

Next Steps
----------

Visit `eProsima Shapes Demo Documentation <https://eprosima-shapes-demo.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`_ for more information on how to use this application.

Commit message:

Add running ROS 2 Shapes Demo section
Signed-off-by: RaulSanchez <raul@eprosima.com>

docs/rst/introduction/tools/shapes_demo.rst, after:

.. _vulcanexus_shapes_demo:

ROS 2 Shapes Demo
=================

*ROS 2 Shapes Demo* is an application in which Publishers and Subscribers are shapes of different colors and sizes moving on a board.
Each shape refers to its own topic: Square, Triangle or Circle.
A single instance of the *ROS 2 Shapes Demo* can publish on or subscribe to several topics at a time.

It demonstrates the capabilities of eProsima Fast DDS or as a proof of interoperability with other DDS-compliant implementations.

.. raw:: html

    <video width=100% height=auto autoplay loop controls>
        <source src="../../../_static/interoperability.mp4">
        Your browser does not support the video tag.
    </video>
    <br></br>


Running ROS 2 Shapes Demo
-------------------------

*ROS 2 Shapes Demo* application is available in the **Vulcaenxus Tools**, **Vulcanexus Base** and **Vulcanexus Desktop** packages.
Regardless of the installation method used, to run *ROS 2 Shapes Demo*, load the Vulcanexus environment first, and then run ``shapesdemo``.

.. code-block:: bash

    source /opt/vulcanexus/humble/setup.bash
    shapesdemo


Getting started
---------------

After the executable is launched, a window similar to the one presented in the following image should be displayed.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/intro/tools/shapes_demo/mainWindow.png
   :alt: Main Window
   :align: center


Publishing a Topic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Publish button allow the users to define the Shape (topic) and Quality of Service (QoS) for their publication.
The following image shows an example of the Publication menu.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/intro/tools/shapes_demo/publish.png
   :scale: 100 %
   :alt: Publish Window
   :align: center

There are multiple parameters that the user can define in this menu:

*   **Shape**: This parameter defines the topic where the publication is going to occur.
    Three different shapes can be published: ``Square``, ``Circle`` and ``Triangle`` (see `Fast DDS Topic Documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/topic/typeSupport/typeSupport.html#data-types-with-a-key>`_).
*   **Color**: The user can define the color of the shape.
*   **Size**: This parameter allows to control the size of the shape.
    The size can vary between ``1`` and ``99``.
*   **Partition**: The user can select different partitions to differentiate groups of publishers and subscribers.
    The user can select between four partitions (``A``, ``B``, ``C`` and ``D``).
    Additionally the user can select the ``*`` partition, that will be matched against all other partitions (see `Fast DDS Partitions Documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/domain/domainParticipant/partition.html?#partitions>`_).

    .. note::

        Using the wildcard (``*``) partition is not the same as not using any partition.
        A publisher that uses the wildcard partition will not be matched with a subscriber that do not defines any partitions.

*   **Reliable**: The user can select to disable the ``Reliable`` check-box to use a ``Best-Effort`` publisher (see `Fast DDS ReliabilityQosPolicy Documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/core/policy/standardQosPolicies.html#reliabilityqospolicy>`_).
*   **History and Durability**: The publishers's History is set to ``KEEP_LAST``.
    The user can select the number of samples that the publisher is going to save and whether this History is going to be ``VOLATILE`` or ``TRANSIENT_LOCAL``.
    The latter will send that last stored values to subscribers joining after the publisher has been created (see `Fast DDS DurabilityQosPolicy Documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/core/policy/standardQosPolicies.html#durabilityqospolicy>`_).
*   **Liveliness**: The user can select the Liveliness QoS of the publisher from three different values: ``AUTOMATIC``, ``MANUAL_BY_PARTICIPANT`` and ``MANUAL_BY_TOPIC``.
    The Lease Duration value and Announcement Period can also be configured.
    The latter only applies if Liveliness is set to ``AUTOMATIC`` or ``MANUAL_BY_PARTICIPANT`` (see `Fast DDS LivelinessQosPolicy Documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/core/policy/standardQosPolicies.html#livelinessqospolicy>`_).
*   **Ownership**: The Ownership QoS determines whether the key (color) of a Topic (Shape) is owned by a single publisher.
    If the selected ownership is ``EXCLUSIVE`` the publisher will use the Ownership strength value as the strength of its publication.
    Only the publisher with the highest strength can publish in the same Topic with the same Key (see `Fast DDS OwnershipQosPolicy Documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/core/policy/standardQosPolicies.html#ownershipqospolicy>`_).
*   **Deadline**: The Deadline QoS determines the maximum expected amount of time between samples.
    When the deadline is missed the application will be notified and a message will be printed on the console (see `Fast DDS DeadlineQosPolicy Documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/core/policy/standardQosPolicies.html#deadlineqospolicy>`_).
*   **Lifespan**: The Lifespan QoS determines the duration while the sample is still valid.
    When a sample's lifespan expires, it will be removed from publisher and subscriber histories.
    (see `Fast DDS LifespanQosPolicy Documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/core/policy/standardQosPolicies.html#lifespanqospolicy>`_).

.. note::

    Using Lifespan QoS will not have any visual effect.

Subscribing to a Topic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When the Subscriber button is pressed, a new window appear to allow the user to define the Shape (topic) and Quality of Service for its subscription.
The following image shows an example of the Subscribe menu.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/intro/tools/shapes_demo/subscribe.png
   :alt: Subscribe Window
   :align: center

This menu is highly similar to the Publication menu but the user cannot change the color and size of the Shape, and it has additional elements:

*   **Liveliness**: This QoS policy is applied in the same way as in the publisher except for the Announcement Period, which does not apply for the Subscriber (see `Fast DDS LivelinessQosPolicy Documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/core/policy/standardQosPolicies.html#livelinessqospolicy>`_).
*   **Time Based Filter**: This value can be used by the user to specify the minimum amount of time (in milliseconds) that the subscriber wants between updates (see `Fast DDS TimeBasedFilterQosPolicy Documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/core/policy/standardQosPolicies.html#timebasedfilterqospolicy>`_).
*   **Content Based Filter**: This filter draws a rectangle in the instances window.
    Only the shapes that are included in this rectangle are accepted while the rest of them are ignored.
    The user can dynamically resize and move this content filter.

.. note::

    Using Lifespan QoS will not have any visual effect.

Participant configuration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
The *ROS 2 Shapes Demo* application allows the user to define Participant policies.
To see the Options window, please go to Options->Participant Configuration in the main bar.
The following image shows the Options Menu.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/intro/tools/shapes_demo/participant.png
   :scale: 75 %
   :alt: Options Window
   :align: center

-   **Transport Protocol**:  You can select between `UDP <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/transport/tcp/tcp.html#transport-tcp-tcp>`_ protocol, `TCP <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/transport/shared_memory/shared_memory.html#transport-sharedmemory-sharedmemory>`_ LAN Server, TCP WAN Server or TCP Client, and `Shared Memory <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/transport/shared_memory/shared_memory.html#transport-sharedmemory-sharedmemory>`_ transport. In case no transport has been activated, *Fast DDS* default transports will be used (UDP + SHM) (see `Fast DDS Transports Documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/transport/transport.html>`_).

-   **Same host delivery**:  *Fast DDS* has some features that allow Participants running in the same host or process
    to share resources in order to improve the communication:

    - **Intraprocess**: Allow using Intraprocess delivery when both Endpoints are running in the same process (see `Fast DDS Intraprocess Documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/transport/intraprocess.html#intraprocess-delivery>`_).

    - **Data Sharing**: Allow using Data Sharing delivery when both Endpoints are running in the same host (see `Fast DDS Data Sharing Documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/transport/datasharing.html#datasharing-delivery>`_).

-   **Domain**: The user can select different Domain IDs.
    Shapes Demo instances using different Domain IDs will not communicate.
    To modify the Domain ID the user needs to stop the participant (thus removing all existing publishers and subscribers) and start a new one with the new Domain ID (see `Fast DDS Domain Documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/domain/domain.html>`_).

-   **Statistics**: The user can activate *Fast DDS Statistics module* so different instrumentation data could be
    collected and analyzed by the *Fast DDS Statistics Backend*, or be represented by *Fast DDS Monitor*.
    This module requires to have compiled *Fast DDS* with Statistics Module ON (see `Fast DDS Statistics Module Documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/statistics/statistics.html>`_).

In case that the Participant is already running, it should be stopped in order to change its configuration.
This will drop every endpoint already created.

Endpoints and Output tabs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A table including all created endpoints is also provided.
An example of this legend is shown in the following figure.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/intro/tools/shapes_demo/table1.png
   :alt: Endpoints
   :align: center

This table can be used to remove endpoints.
Two methods are provided:

- Right click in an endpoint: An option to remove the endpoint is shown.
- Pressing the delete button when the endpoint is selected.

The output tab shows the output log messages.
An example of the output tab is shown in the figure below.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/intro/tools/shapes_demo/table2.png
   :alt: Outputs
   :align: center

Next Steps
----------

Visit `eProsima Shapes Demo Documentation <https://eprosima-shapes-demo.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`_ for more information on how to use this application.
