docs/rst/tutorials/tools/fastdds_monitor/fastdds_monitor.rst, before:

.. _tutorials_tools_fastdds_monitor:

ROS 2 network statistics inspection with ROS 2 Monitor
======================================================

.. contents::
    :depth: 2
    :local:
    :backlinks: none

Background
----------

Vulcanexus integrates the `ROS 2 Monitor <https://fast-dds-monitor.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`_, a powerful tool for monitoring and studying ROS 2 networks. Since ROS 2 relies on the `DDS specification <https://www.omg.org/spec/DDS/1.4/About-DDS/>`_ for communication between nodes, this tool simplifies the process of observing network activity.
With automatic entity discovery within a local network, users can easily identify active Participants, their Endpoints, the Topics they utilize, and even the network interfaces used for communication.
Moreover, the `ROS 2 Statistics Module <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/statistics/statistics.html>`_ enables the collection of statistical data from every endpoint in the network. This data is very useful for analyzing the DDS network performance and diagnosing possible communication issues.

This tutorial provides step-by-step instructions to use Vulcanexus for monitoring a ROS 2 talker/listener demo.

Prerequisites
-------------

Ensure that the Vulcanexus installation includes Vulcanexus Tools (either ``vulcanexus-jazzy-desktop``, ``vulcanexus-jazzy-tools``, or ``vulcanexus-jazzy-base``).
Also, remember to source the environment in every terminal in this tutorial.

.. code-block:: bash

    source /opt/vulcanexus/jazzy/setup.bash

Launch ROS 2 Monitor
--------------------

Initiate *ROS 2 Monitor* running the following command:

.. code-block:: bash

    fastdds_monitor

Once *ROS 2 Monitor* is launched, start a monitor in domain :code:`0` (default domain).

.. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/tools/monitor_screenshots/Init_domain.png
    :align: center

Execute ROS 2 demo nodes with statistics
----------------------------------------

In order to activate the publication of statistical data, `eProsima Fast DDS <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/>`_ requires an environment variable specifying which kinds of statistical data are to be reported.
Consequently, before launching the ROS 2 nodes, remember to set ``FASTDDS_STATISTICS`` environment variable.
Run the following commands in different terminals (remember to source the Vulcanexus environment):

.. code-block:: bash

    export FASTDDS_STATISTICS="HISTORY_LATENCY_TOPIC;NETWORK_LATENCY_TOPIC;PUBLICATION_THROUGHPUT_TOPIC;\
    SUBSCRIPTION_THROUGHPUT_TOPIC;RTPS_SENT_TOPIC;RTPS_LOST_TOPIC;\
    HEARTBEAT_COUNT_TOPIC;ACKNACK_COUNT_TOPIC;NACKFRAG_COUNT_TOPIC;\
    GAP_COUNT_TOPIC;DATA_COUNT_TOPIC;RESENT_DATAS_TOPIC;SAMPLE_DATAS_TOPIC;\
    PDP_PACKETS_TOPIC;EDP_PACKETS_TOPIC;DISCOVERY_TOPIC;PHYSICAL_DATA_TOPIC"

    ros2 run demo_nodes_cpp listener

.. code-block:: bash

    export FASTDDS_STATISTICS="HISTORY_LATENCY_TOPIC;NETWORK_LATENCY_TOPIC;PUBLICATION_THROUGHPUT_TOPIC;\
    SUBSCRIPTION_THROUGHPUT_TOPIC;RTPS_SENT_TOPIC;RTPS_LOST_TOPIC;\
    HEARTBEAT_COUNT_TOPIC;ACKNACK_COUNT_TOPIC;NACKFRAG_COUNT_TOPIC;\
    GAP_COUNT_TOPIC;DATA_COUNT_TOPIC;RESENT_DATAS_TOPIC;SAMPLE_DATAS_TOPIC;\
    PDP_PACKETS_TOPIC;EDP_PACKETS_TOPIC;DISCOVERY_TOPIC;PHYSICAL_DATA_TOPIC"

    ros2 run demo_nodes_cpp talker

Monitoring network
------------------

Now, the two new Participants are visible in the *ROS 2 Monitor*'s DDS Panel.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/tools/monitor_screenshots/Participants.png
    :align: center

Domain View
^^^^^^^^^^^

To easily inspect the structure of the DDS network created, open the *Domain View* in the Main Panel.
In this tab, we can see a graph describing the structure of our network: our single Host contains our single User,
which in turn contains both our Processes, each containing a number of DataReaders and DataWriters. We can see a
number of Topics, presented as vertical gray lines, related to the code of the listener and talker. Only one of them,
:code:`rt/chatter`, relates two entities, a DataWriter and a DataReader: this is the Topic that is being
used to exchange information.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/tools/monitor_screenshots/Domain_Graph.png
    :align: center

The *Domain View* allows us to access different possibilities. By pressing *right-click* on top of the Topic name, we can
find several options, such as filtering the graph by the Topic (selecting *Filter topic graph*). Clicking on the
:code:`rt/chatter` Topic, we can easily see the entities exchanging information.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/tools/monitor_screenshots/Topic_filter.png
    :align: center

Additionally, we can access the we can access the IDL representation of any of the Topics, by pressing right-click over
the Topic name, and choosing *Data type IDL view*. This opens a new Tab with the required information, which can be
copied and pasted.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/tools/monitor_screenshots/IDL_img_jazzy.png
    :align: center

Alias
^^^^^

Participants in ROS 2 are named :code:`/` by default.
In order to differentiate them, it is possible to change the Participant's aliases within the *ROS 2 Monitor*. This can
be done either from the Explorer Panel, or from the Domain View panel, by pressing *righ click* on top of the
entity. The :code:`talker` would be the one with a :code:`chatter` DataWriter, and the :code:`listener` the one with a
:code:`chatter` DataReader. Since we're not going to be using this Tab anymore, click on the *X* to return to the
:code:`New Tab` view.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/tools/monitor_screenshots/Alias_new.png
    :align: center

Statistical data
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To show statistical data about the communication between the :code:`talker` and the :code:`listener`, follow the steps to `create dynamic series chart <https://fast-dds-monitor.readthedocs.io/en/latest/rst/getting_started/tutorial.html#tutorial-create-dynamic-series>`_.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/tools/monitor_screenshots/Statistics.png
    :align: center

Introspect metatraffic topics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

*ROS 2 Monitor* filters by default the topics used for sharing metatraffic, as well as the endpoints related to them, so users can inspect their network easily.
These topics are the ones that ROS 2 uses for discovery and configuration purposes, such as :code:`ros_discovery_info`, as well as those used by Fast DDS to report statistical data.

In order to see these topics in the monitor, click *View->Show Metatraffic* menu button.
Now, these topics are shown in the logical panel. Furthermore, the Readers and Writers associated to them are now listed under their respective Participants.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/tools/monitor_screenshots/Metatraffic.png
    :align: center

Commit message:

Refs 22865: Tutorial on how to use ROS 2 topics generating the IDL with Fast DDS Monitor
Signed-off-by: Juanjo Garcia <juanjosegarcia@eprosima.com>

docs/rst/tutorials/tools/fastdds_monitor/fastdds_monitor.rst, after:

.. _tutorials_tools_fastdds_monitor:

ROS 2 network statistics inspection with ROS 2 Monitor
======================================================

.. contents::
    :depth: 2
    :local:
    :backlinks: none

Background
----------

Vulcanexus integrates the `ROS 2 Monitor <https://fast-dds-monitor.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`_, a powerful tool for monitoring and studying ROS 2 networks. Since ROS 2 relies on the `DDS specification <https://www.omg.org/spec/DDS/1.4/About-DDS/>`_ for communication between nodes, this tool simplifies the process of observing network activity.
With automatic entity discovery within a local network, users can easily identify active Participants, their Endpoints, the Topics they utilize, and even the network interfaces used for communication.
Moreover, the `ROS 2 Statistics Module <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/statistics/statistics.html>`_ enables the collection of statistical data from every endpoint in the network. This data is very useful for analyzing the DDS network performance and diagnosing possible communication issues.

This tutorial provides step-by-step instructions to use Vulcanexus for monitoring a ROS 2 talker/listener demo.

Prerequisites
-------------

Ensure that the Vulcanexus installation includes Vulcanexus Tools (either ``vulcanexus-jazzy-desktop``, ``vulcanexus-jazzy-tools``, or ``vulcanexus-jazzy-base``).
Also, remember to source the environment in every terminal in this tutorial.

.. code-block:: bash

    source /opt/vulcanexus/jazzy/setup.bash

Launch ROS 2 Monitor
--------------------

Initiate *ROS 2 Monitor* running the following command:

.. code-block:: bash

    fastdds_monitor

Once *ROS 2 Monitor* is launched, start a monitor in domain :code:`0` (default domain).

.. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/tools/monitor_screenshots/Init_domain.png
    :align: center

Execute ROS 2 demo nodes with statistics
----------------------------------------

In order to activate the publication of statistical data, `eProsima Fast DDS <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/>`_ requires an environment variable specifying which kinds of statistical data are to be reported.
Consequently, before launching the ROS 2 nodes, remember to set ``FASTDDS_STATISTICS`` environment variable.
Run the following commands in different terminals (remember to source the Vulcanexus environment):

.. code-block:: bash

    export FASTDDS_STATISTICS="HISTORY_LATENCY_TOPIC;NETWORK_LATENCY_TOPIC;PUBLICATION_THROUGHPUT_TOPIC;\
    SUBSCRIPTION_THROUGHPUT_TOPIC;RTPS_SENT_TOPIC;RTPS_LOST_TOPIC;\
    HEARTBEAT_COUNT_TOPIC;ACKNACK_COUNT_TOPIC;NACKFRAG_COUNT_TOPIC;\
    GAP_COUNT_TOPIC;DATA_COUNT_TOPIC;RESENT_DATAS_TOPIC;SAMPLE_DATAS_TOPIC;\
    PDP_PACKETS_TOPIC;EDP_PACKETS_TOPIC;DISCOVERY_TOPIC;PHYSICAL_DATA_TOPIC"

    ros2 run demo_nodes_cpp listener

.. code-block:: bash

    export FASTDDS_STATISTICS="HISTORY_LATENCY_TOPIC;NETWORK_LATENCY_TOPIC;PUBLICATION_THROUGHPUT_TOPIC;\
    SUBSCRIPTION_THROUGHPUT_TOPIC;RTPS_SENT_TOPIC;RTPS_LOST_TOPIC;\
    HEARTBEAT_COUNT_TOPIC;ACKNACK_COUNT_TOPIC;NACKFRAG_COUNT_TOPIC;\
    GAP_COUNT_TOPIC;DATA_COUNT_TOPIC;RESENT_DATAS_TOPIC;SAMPLE_DATAS_TOPIC;\
    PDP_PACKETS_TOPIC;EDP_PACKETS_TOPIC;DISCOVERY_TOPIC;PHYSICAL_DATA_TOPIC"

    ros2 run demo_nodes_cpp talker

Monitoring network
------------------

Now, the two new Participants are visible in the *ROS 2 Monitor*'s DDS Panel.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/tools/monitor_screenshots/Participants.png
    :align: center

Domain View
^^^^^^^^^^^

To easily inspect the structure of the DDS network created, open the *Domain View* in the Main Panel.
In this tab, we can see a graph describing the structure of our network: our single Host contains our single User,
which in turn contains both our Processes, each containing a number of DataReaders and DataWriters. We can see a
number of Topics, presented as vertical gray lines, related to the code of the listener and talker. Only one of them,
:code:`rt/chatter`, relates two entities, a DataWriter and a DataReader: this is the Topic that is being
used to exchange information.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/tools/monitor_screenshots/Domain_Graph.png
    :align: center

The *Domain View* allows us to access different possibilities. By pressing *right-click* on top of the Topic name, we can
find several options, such as filtering the graph by the Topic (selecting *Filter topic graph*). Clicking on the
:code:`rt/chatter` Topic, we can easily see the entities exchanging information.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/tools/monitor_screenshots/Topic_filter.png
    :align: center

Additionally, we can access the we can access the IDL representation of any of the Topics, by pressing right-click over
the Topic name, and choosing *Data type IDL view*. This opens a new Tab with the required information, which can be
copied and pasted. Note that for ROS 2 topics, the IDL representation is demangled by default (can be undone in *View->Revert ROS 2 Demangling*).

.. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/tools/monitor_screenshots/IDL_img_jazzy2.png
    :align: center

Alias
^^^^^

Participants in ROS 2 are named :code:`/` by default.
In order to differentiate them, it is possible to change the Participant's aliases within the *ROS 2 Monitor*. This can
be done either from the Explorer Panel, or from the Domain View panel, by pressing *righ click* on top of the
entity. The :code:`talker` would be the one with a :code:`chatter` DataWriter, and the :code:`listener` the one with a
:code:`chatter` DataReader. Since we're not going to be using this Tab anymore, click on the *X* to return to the
:code:`New Tab` view.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/tools/monitor_screenshots/Alias_new.png
    :align: center

Statistical data
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To show statistical data about the communication between the :code:`talker` and the :code:`listener`, follow the steps to `create dynamic series chart <https://fast-dds-monitor.readthedocs.io/en/latest/rst/getting_started/tutorial.html#tutorial-create-dynamic-series>`_.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/tools/monitor_screenshots/Statistics.png
    :align: center

Introspect metatraffic topics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

*ROS 2 Monitor* filters by default the topics used for sharing metatraffic, as well as the endpoints related to them, so users can inspect their network easily.
These topics are the ones that ROS 2 uses for discovery and configuration purposes, such as :code:`ros_discovery_info`, as well as those used by Fast DDS to report statistical data.

In order to see these topics in the monitor, click *View->Show Metatraffic* menu button.
Now, these topics are shown in the logical panel. Furthermore, the Readers and Writers associated to them are now listed under their respective Participants.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/tools/monitor_screenshots/Metatraffic.png
    :align: center
