docs/rst/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/dds2vulcanexus_topic.rst, before:

.. _dds2vulcanexus_topic:

Fast DDS - Vulcanexus Topic Intercommunication
==============================================

This tutorial presents a step-by-step demonstration on how to intercommunicate Vulcanexus applications with native Fast DDS applications.

.. contents::
    :depth: 2
    :local:
    :backlinks: none

.. _dds2vulcanexus_topic_background:

Background
----------

Being Fast DDS the default Vulcanexus middleware enables the possibility of intercommunicating Vulcanexus applications with native Fast DDS ones.
This is of special interest when integrating pre-existing systems with each other, such as interfacing with a third-party software which exposes a DDS API.
Since both Fast DDS' and Vulcanexus' backbone is DDS, it is possible to intercommunicate full-blown systems running a Vulcanexus stack with smaller systems for which Vulcanexus is either unnecessary or unfit, such as more constrained environments or applications that would not require any Vulcanexus functionality other than the middleware.

.. uml::
    :align: center

    package "Controller MCU" {
        [Fast DDS Motor controller] as controller
    }

    package "Robot's main MCU" {
        [Vulcanexus path planner] => controller : <<DDS>>
    }

.. _dds2vulcanexus_topic_prerequisites:

Prerequisites
-------------

For convenience, this tutorial is built and run within a Docker environment, although Docker is not required.
The tutorial focuses on the explanations regarding message type and topic name compatibilities rather than given an in depth explanation about the code used.
Create a clean workspace and download the *Vulcanexus - Fast DDS Topic Intercommunication* project:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Create directory structure
    mkdir ~/vulcanexus_dds_ws
    cd ~/vulcanexus_dds_ws
    mkdir fastdds_app idl vulcanexus_app
    # Download project source code
    wget -O CMakeLists.txt https://raw.githubusercontent.com/eProsima/vulcanexus/iron/docs/resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/CMakeLists.txt
    wget -O Dockerfile https://raw.githubusercontent.com/eProsima/vulcanexus/iron/docs/resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/Dockerfile
    wget -O package.xml https://raw.githubusercontent.com/eProsima/vulcanexus/iron/docs/resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/package.xml
    wget -O README.md https://raw.githubusercontent.com/eProsima/vulcanexus/iron/docs/resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/README.md
    wget -O fastdds_app/subscriber.cpp https://raw.githubusercontent.com/eProsima/vulcanexus/iron/docs/resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/fastdds_app/subscriber.cpp
    wget -O idl/HelloWorld.idl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/eProsima/vulcanexus/iron/docs/resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/idl/HelloWorld.idl
    wget -O vulcanexus_app/publisher.cpp https://raw.githubusercontent.com/eProsima/vulcanexus/iron/docs/resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/vulcanexus_app/publisher.cpp

The resulting directory structure should be:

.. code-block::

    ~/vulcanexus_dds_ws/
    ├── CMakeLists.txt
    ├── Dockerfile
    ├── fastdds_app
    │   └── subscriber.cpp
    ├── idl
    │   └── HelloWorld.idl
    ├── package.xml
    ├── README.md
    └── vulcanexus_app
        └── publisher.cpp

Finally, the Docker image can be built with:

.. code-block:: bash

    cd ~/vulcanexus_dds_ws
    docker build -f Dockerfile -t dds2vulcanexus .

.. _dds2vulcanexus_topic_idl:

IDL type definition
-------------------

Although the ``msg`` format used to be the preferred way to describe topic types in ROS 2 (just to ease the migration from ROS types), they get converted into ``IDL`` under the hood before the actual topic type related code is generated on the CMake call to ``rosidl_generate_interfaces``.
This means that the topic type definitions can be written as ``IDL`` files directly, allowing for a straight forward type compatibility with native DDS applications, since the standardized type definition format in DDS is in fact ``IDL``.
For a complete correspondence matrix between ``msg`` and ``IDL`` types (referred as `DDS Types` in the table), please refer to :ref:`message_descriptions_field_types`.

This tutorial leverages ROS 2 capabilities of describing types in ``IDL`` to define a `HelloWorld.idl` that will be used by both the Vulcanexus and native Fast DDS applications.
The `HelloWorld.idl`, and its ``msg`` equivalent is as follows:

.. tabs::

  .. tab:: HelloWorld.idl

        .. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/idl/HelloWorld.idl
            :language: IDL


  .. tab:: HelloWorld.msg

    .. code-block::

        uint32 index
        string message

It is important to note that ``rosidl_generate_interfaces`` converts the simple `HelloWorld.msg` into and ``IDL`` containing the structure (which is named after the ``msg`` file name) within 2 nested modules, the outermost being the package name (in this case `dds2vulcanexus`), and the innermost being the name of the directory in which the file is located.
Mind that in the aforementioned directory structure, the ``IDL`` file is placed within an `idl` directory, hence the name of the innermost module.

The following sections detail how to incorporate the ``IDL`` message definition into both the Vulcanexus and native Fast DDS applications, covering both the C++ and CMake sides.

.. _dds2vulcanexus_topic_vulcanexus:

Vulcanexus Application
----------------------

On this tutorial, the Vulcanexus application consists on a simple publisher node which will publish messages to the ``HelloWorld`` topic once a second.

.. _dds2vulcanexus_topic_vulcanexus_generation:

Vulcanexus Application - Type generation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Inspecting the `CMakeLists.txt` file downloaded in :ref:`dds2vulcanexus_topic_prerequisites`, the following CMake code pertains the Vulcanexus publisher:

.. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/CMakeLists.txt
    :language: CMake
    :lines: 30-57

In particular, the type related code is generated in:

.. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/CMakeLists.txt
    :language: CMake
    :lines: 38-43

.. _dds2vulcanexus_topic_vulcanexus_c++:

Vulcanexus Application - C++
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The simple Vulcanexus publisher node is as follows:

.. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/vulcanexus_app/publisher.cpp
    :language: c++

To use the type generated from the IDL, three things are done:

1. Include the generated type header:

    .. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/vulcanexus_app/publisher.cpp
        :language: c++
        :lines: 22

2. Create a publisher in a ``HelloWorld`` topic which uses the generated type.

    1. First, the ``HelloWorldPublisher`` ``Node`` class stores a shared pointer to the publisher:

        .. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/vulcanexus_app/publisher.cpp
                :language: c++
                :lines: 50
                :dedent: 2

    2. Then, upon construction, it instantiates the publisher, assigning it to the shared pointer class data member:

        .. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/vulcanexus_app/publisher.cpp
                :language: c++
                :lines: 35
                :dedent: 4

3. Publish data on the topic.
   In this case, the ``HelloWorldPublisher`` is using a wall timer to have periodic publications:

        1. ``HelloWorldPublisher`` has a data member for reusing the sample:

            .. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/vulcanexus_app/publisher.cpp
                :language: c++
                :lines: 51
                :dedent: 2

        2. ``HelloWorldPublisher``, upon construction, creates said wall timer, which is used to publish data:

            .. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/vulcanexus_app/publisher.cpp
                :language: c++
                :lines: 37-45
                :dedent: 4

.. _dds2vulcanexus_topic_fastdds:

Fast DDS Application
--------------------

Much like the Vulcanexus application, the native Fast DDS one consists on two parts:

1. The generated type related code (a.k.a type support).
2. The application code

.. _dds2vulcanexus_topic_fastdds_generation:

Fast DDS Application - Type generation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In the case of Fast DDS, the type support is generated from the `HelloWorld.idl` file using `Fast DDS-Gen <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastddsgen/introduction/introduction.html>`_.

In this tutorial, the Fast DDS type support is generated within the `CMakeLists.txt` file for the sake of completion and simplicity, but it can be generated as a pre-build step instead.
Inspecting the `CMakeLists.txt` file downloaded in :ref:`dds2vulcanexus_topic_prerequisites`, the following CMake code pertains the native Fast DDS subscriber:

.. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/CMakeLists.txt
    :language: CMake
    :lines: 59-93

In particular, the type generation related code is:

.. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/CMakeLists.txt
    :language: CMake
    :lines: 65-82

The call to *Fast DDS-Gen* within ``add_custom_command`` will generate the type support in the `fastdds_app` directory, leaving the file names in a convenient ``GENERATED_TYPE_SUPPORT_FILES`` CMake variable that is later used to add the source files to the executable.
It is important to note the *Fast DDS-Gen* is called with the `-typeros2` flag, so it generates ROS 2 compatible type names.

.. _dds2vulcanexus_topic_fastdds_c++:

Fast DDS Application - C++
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The native Fast DDS subscriber is as follows:

.. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/fastdds_app/subscriber.cpp
    :language: c++

There are several things to unpack in this application:

1. ``HelloWorldSubscriber`` holds both a reference to the type support, to create the topic, and a ``HelloWorld`` sample instance for reusing it upon reception.

    .. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/fastdds_app/subscriber.cpp
        :language: c++
        :lines: 115-116
        :dedent: 4

    1. The type support is instantiated upon construction:

        .. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/fastdds_app/subscriber.cpp
            :language: c++
            :lines: 37-42
            :dedent: 4

    2. Then, it is registered in the ``DomainParticipant`` for further use:

        .. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/fastdds_app/subscriber.cpp
            :language: c++
            :lines: 72
            :dedent: 8

2. The topic is created with name ``rt/HelloWorld``.
   Mind that this topic name is different from the one set in the Vulcanexus publisher (``HelloWorld``).
   This is because Vulcanexus appends ``rt/`` to the topic name passed when creating a ``Publisher`` or ``Subscription``, where ``rt`` stands for *ROS Topic*, as services and actions have different prefixes (please refer to ROS 2 design documentation regarding `Topic and Service name mapping to DDS <https://design.ros2.org/articles/topic_and_service_names.html>`_).
   Another important detail is the type name, which in this example is extracted from the type support directly, as the type is generated with ROS 2 naming compatibility (see :ref:`dds2vulcanexus_topic_fastdds_generation`).

       .. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/fastdds_app/subscriber.cpp
            :language: c++
            :lines: 74-79
            :dedent: 8


3. A ``DataReader`` is created in the topic, setting the very ``HelloWorldSubscriber`` as listener, since it inherits from ``DataReaderListener``, overriding the ``on_data_available`` callback:

    .. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/fastdds_app/subscriber.cpp
        :language: c++
        :lines: 81-91
        :dedent: 8

4. Finally, when a new sample arrives, Fast DDS calls the implementation of ``on_data_available``, which print the data to the ``STDOUT``:

    .. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/fastdds_app/subscriber.cpp
        :language: c++
        :lines: 96-107
        :dedent: 4

.. _dds2vulcanexus_topic_run:

Run the demo
------------

Once the Docker image is built, running the demo simply require two terminals.
The image can be run in each of them with:

.. code-block:: bash

    docker run -it --rm dds2vulcanexus

Then, run the publisher on one of the containers and the subscriber on the other:

.. tabs::

  .. tab:: Publisher

    .. code-block::

        vulcanexus_publisher


  .. tab:: Subscriber

    .. code-block::

        fastdds_subscriber

.. raw:: html

    <video width=100% height=auto autoplay loop controls>
        <source src="../../../../../_static/resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/dds2vulcanexus.mp4">
        Your browser does not support the video tag.
    </video>

Commit message:

Add documentation for the new Fast DDS v3 support (#210)
* Refs #21590: Add documentation for Fast DDS 3.0 in Vulcanexus

Signed-off-by: Mario Dominguez <mariodominguez@eprosima.com>

* Refs #21590: Apply rev suggestions

Signed-off-by: JesusPoderoso <jesuspoderoso@eprosima.com>

* Refs #21590: Set Fast DDS '3.0' references as 'v3'

Signed-off-by: JesusPoderoso <jesuspoderoso@eprosima.com>

* Refs #21590: Restore '@final'

Signed-off-by: JesusPoderoso <jesuspoderoso@eprosima.com>

* Refs #21590: Elaborate Mario's consideration, keeping it as a hint

Signed-off-by: JesusPoderoso <jesuspoderoso@eprosima.com>

---------

Signed-off-by: Mario Dominguez <mariodominguez@eprosima.com>
Signed-off-by: JesusPoderoso <jesuspoderoso@eprosima.com>
Co-authored-by: JesusPoderoso <jesuspoderoso@eprosima.com>

docs/rst/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/dds2vulcanexus_topic.rst, after:

.. _dds2vulcanexus_topic:

Fast DDS - Vulcanexus Topic Intercommunication
==============================================

This tutorial presents a step-by-step demonstration on how to intercommunicate Vulcanexus applications with native Fast DDS applications.

.. contents::
    :depth: 2
    :local:
    :backlinks: none

.. _dds2vulcanexus_topic_background:

Background
----------

Being Fast DDS the default Vulcanexus middleware enables the possibility of intercommunicating Vulcanexus applications with native Fast DDS ones.
This is of special interest when integrating pre-existing systems with each other, such as interfacing with a third-party software which exposes a DDS API.
Since both Fast DDS' and Vulcanexus' backbone is DDS, it is possible to intercommunicate full-blown systems running a Vulcanexus stack with smaller systems for which Vulcanexus is either unnecessary or unfit, such as more constrained environments or applications that would not require any Vulcanexus functionality other than the middleware.

.. uml::
    :align: center

    package "Controller MCU" {
        [Fast DDS Motor controller] as controller
    }

    package "Robot's main MCU" {
        [Vulcanexus path planner] => controller : <<DDS>>
    }

.. _dds2vulcanexus_topic_prerequisites:

Prerequisites
-------------

For convenience, this tutorial is built and run within a Docker environment, although Docker is not required.
The tutorial focuses on the explanations regarding message type and topic name compatibilities rather than given an in depth explanation about the code used.
Create a clean workspace and download the *Vulcanexus - Fast DDS Topic Intercommunication* project:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Create directory structure
    mkdir ~/vulcanexus_dds_ws
    cd ~/vulcanexus_dds_ws
    mkdir fastdds_app idl vulcanexus_app
    # Download project source code
    wget -O CMakeLists.txt https://raw.githubusercontent.com/eProsima/vulcanexus/iron/docs/resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/CMakeLists.txt
    wget -O Dockerfile https://raw.githubusercontent.com/eProsima/vulcanexus/iron/docs/resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/Dockerfile
    wget -O package.xml https://raw.githubusercontent.com/eProsima/vulcanexus/iron/docs/resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/package.xml
    wget -O README.md https://raw.githubusercontent.com/eProsima/vulcanexus/iron/docs/resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/README.md
    wget -O fastdds_app/subscriber.cpp https://raw.githubusercontent.com/eProsima/vulcanexus/iron/docs/resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/fastdds_app/subscriber.cpp
    wget -O idl/HelloWorld.idl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/eProsima/vulcanexus/iron/docs/resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/idl/HelloWorld.idl
    wget -O vulcanexus_app/publisher.cpp https://raw.githubusercontent.com/eProsima/vulcanexus/iron/docs/resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/vulcanexus_app/publisher.cpp

The resulting directory structure should be:

.. code-block::

    ~/vulcanexus_dds_ws/
    ├── CMakeLists.txt
    ├── Dockerfile
    ├── fastdds_app
    │   └── subscriber.cpp
    ├── idl
    │   └── HelloWorld.idl
    ├── package.xml
    ├── README.md
    └── vulcanexus_app
        └── publisher.cpp

Finally, the Docker image can be built with:

.. code-block:: bash

    cd ~/vulcanexus_dds_ws
    docker build -f Dockerfile -t dds2vulcanexus .

.. _dds2vulcanexus_topic_idl:

IDL type definition
-------------------

Although the ``msg`` format used to be the preferred way to describe topic types in ROS 2 (just to ease the migration from ROS types), they get converted into ``IDL`` under the hood before the actual topic type related code is generated on the CMake call to ``rosidl_generate_interfaces``.
This means that the topic type definitions can be written as ``IDL`` files directly, allowing for a straight forward type compatibility with native DDS applications, since the standardized type definition format in DDS is in fact ``IDL``.
For a complete correspondence matrix between ``msg`` and ``IDL`` types (referred as `DDS Types` in the table), please refer to :ref:`message_descriptions_field_types`.

This tutorial leverages ROS 2 capabilities of describing types in ``IDL`` to define a `HelloWorld.idl` that will be used by both the Vulcanexus and native Fast DDS applications.
The `HelloWorld.idl`, and its ``msg`` equivalent is as follows:

.. important::

    If generating the type for a Fast DDS native application with Fast DDS-Gen *v4.0.0* (the minimum required for Fast DDS *v3.0.0*), the extensibility  must be explicitly marked as ``@extensibility(FINAL)`` in idl structs.
    Starting from Fast DDS-Gen *v4.0.1*, it can be left unspecified, as it defaults to ``@final``.
    Please, refer to `Fast DDS data types extensibility <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastddsgen/dataTypes/dataTypes.html#extensibility>`__ for further information about type extensibility.

.. tabs::

  .. tab:: HelloWorld.idl

        .. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/idl/HelloWorld.idl
            :language: IDL


  .. tab:: HelloWorld.msg

    .. code-block::

        uint32 index
        string message

It is important to note that ``rosidl_generate_interfaces`` converts the simple `HelloWorld.msg` into and ``IDL`` containing the structure (which is named after the ``msg`` file name) within 2 nested modules, the outermost being the package name (in this case `dds2vulcanexus`), and the innermost being the name of the directory in which the file is located.
Mind that in the aforementioned directory structure, the ``IDL`` file is placed within an `idl` directory, hence the name of the innermost module.

The following sections detail how to incorporate the ``IDL`` message definition into both the Vulcanexus and native Fast DDS applications, covering both the C++ and CMake sides.

.. _dds2vulcanexus_topic_vulcanexus:

Vulcanexus Application
----------------------

On this tutorial, the Vulcanexus application consists on a simple publisher node which will publish messages to the ``HelloWorld`` topic once a second.

.. _dds2vulcanexus_topic_vulcanexus_generation:

Vulcanexus Application - Type generation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Inspecting the `CMakeLists.txt` file downloaded in :ref:`dds2vulcanexus_topic_prerequisites`, the following CMake code pertains the Vulcanexus publisher:

.. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/CMakeLists.txt
    :language: CMake
    :lines: 30-57

In particular, the type related code is generated in:

.. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/CMakeLists.txt
    :language: CMake
    :lines: 38-43

.. _dds2vulcanexus_topic_vulcanexus_c++:

Vulcanexus Application - C++
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The simple Vulcanexus publisher node is as follows:

.. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/vulcanexus_app/publisher.cpp
    :language: c++

To use the type generated from the IDL, three things are done:

1. Include the generated type header:

    .. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/vulcanexus_app/publisher.cpp
        :language: c++
        :lines: 22

2. Create a publisher in a ``HelloWorld`` topic which uses the generated type.

    1. First, the ``HelloWorldPublisher`` ``Node`` class stores a shared pointer to the publisher:

        .. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/vulcanexus_app/publisher.cpp
                :language: c++
                :lines: 50
                :dedent: 2

    2. Then, upon construction, it instantiates the publisher, assigning it to the shared pointer class data member:

        .. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/vulcanexus_app/publisher.cpp
                :language: c++
                :lines: 35
                :dedent: 4

3. Publish data on the topic.
   In this case, the ``HelloWorldPublisher`` is using a wall timer to have periodic publications:

        1. ``HelloWorldPublisher`` has a data member for reusing the sample:

            .. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/vulcanexus_app/publisher.cpp
                :language: c++
                :lines: 51
                :dedent: 2

        2. ``HelloWorldPublisher``, upon construction, creates said wall timer, which is used to publish data:

            .. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/vulcanexus_app/publisher.cpp
                :language: c++
                :lines: 37-45
                :dedent: 4

.. _dds2vulcanexus_topic_fastdds:

Fast DDS Application
--------------------

Much like the Vulcanexus application, the native Fast DDS one consists on two parts:

1. The generated type related code (a.k.a type support).
2. The application code

.. _dds2vulcanexus_topic_fastdds_generation:

Fast DDS Application - Type generation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In the case of Fast DDS, the type support is generated from the `HelloWorld.idl` file using `Fast DDS-Gen <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastddsgen/introduction/introduction.html>`_.

In this tutorial, the Fast DDS type support is generated within the `CMakeLists.txt` file for the sake of completion and simplicity, but it can be generated as a pre-build step instead.
Inspecting the `CMakeLists.txt` file downloaded in :ref:`dds2vulcanexus_topic_prerequisites`, the following CMake code pertains the native Fast DDS subscriber:

.. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/CMakeLists.txt
    :language: CMake
    :lines: 59-93

In particular, the type generation related code is:

.. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/CMakeLists.txt
    :language: CMake
    :lines: 65-82

.. important::

    If generating the type for a Fast DDS native application with Fast DDS-Gen *v4.0.0* (the minimum required for Fast DDS *v3.0.0*), the extensibility  must be explicitly marked as ``@extensibility(FINAL)`` in idl structs.
    Starting from Fast DDS-Gen *v4.0.1*, it can be left unspecified, as it defaults to ``@final``.
    Please, refer to `Fast DDS data types extensibility <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastddsgen/dataTypes/dataTypes.html#extensibility>`__ for further information about type extensibility.

The call to *Fast DDS-Gen* within ``add_custom_command`` will generate the type support in the `fastdds_app` directory, leaving the file names in a convenient ``GENERATED_TYPE_SUPPORT_FILES`` CMake variable that is later used to add the source files to the executable.
It is important to note the *Fast DDS-Gen* is called with the `-typeros2` flag, so it generates ROS 2 compatible type names.

.. _dds2vulcanexus_topic_fastdds_c++:

Fast DDS Application - C++
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The native Fast DDS subscriber is as follows:

.. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/fastdds_app/subscriber.cpp
    :language: c++

There are several things to unpack in this application:

1. ``HelloWorldSubscriber`` holds both a reference to the type support, to create the topic, and a ``HelloWorld`` sample instance for reusing it upon reception.

    .. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/fastdds_app/subscriber.cpp
        :language: c++
        :lines: 115-116
        :dedent: 4

    1. The type support is instantiated upon construction:

        .. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/fastdds_app/subscriber.cpp
            :language: c++
            :lines: 37-42
            :dedent: 4

    2. Then, it is registered in the ``DomainParticipant`` for further use:

        .. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/fastdds_app/subscriber.cpp
            :language: c++
            :lines: 72
            :dedent: 8

2. The topic is created with name ``rt/HelloWorld``.
   Mind that this topic name is different from the one set in the Vulcanexus publisher (``HelloWorld``).
   This is because Vulcanexus appends ``rt/`` to the topic name passed when creating a ``Publisher`` or ``Subscription``, where ``rt`` stands for *ROS Topic*, as services and actions have different prefixes (please refer to ROS 2 design documentation regarding `Topic and Service name mapping to DDS <https://design.ros2.org/articles/topic_and_service_names.html>`_).
   Another important detail is the type name, which in this example is extracted from the type support directly, as the type is generated with ROS 2 naming compatibility (see :ref:`dds2vulcanexus_topic_fastdds_generation`).

       .. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/fastdds_app/subscriber.cpp
            :language: c++
            :lines: 74-79
            :dedent: 8


3. A ``DataReader`` is created in the topic, setting the very ``HelloWorldSubscriber`` as listener, since it inherits from ``DataReaderListener``, overriding the ``on_data_available`` callback:

    .. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/fastdds_app/subscriber.cpp
        :language: c++
        :lines: 81-91
        :dedent: 8

4. Finally, when a new sample arrives, Fast DDS calls the implementation of ``on_data_available``, which print the data to the ``STDOUT``:

    .. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/topic/fastdds_app/subscriber.cpp
        :language: c++
        :lines: 96-107
        :dedent: 4

.. _dds2vulcanexus_topic_run:

Run the demo
------------

Once the Docker image is built, running the demo simply require two terminals.
The image can be run in each of them with:

.. code-block:: bash

    docker run -it --rm dds2vulcanexus

Then, run the publisher on one of the containers and the subscriber on the other:

.. tabs::

  .. tab:: Publisher

    .. code-block::

        vulcanexus_publisher


  .. tab:: Subscriber

    .. code-block::

        fastdds_subscriber

.. raw:: html

    <video width=100% height=auto autoplay loop controls>
        <source src="../../../../../_static/resources/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/dds2vulcanexus.mp4">
        Your browser does not support the video tag.
    </video>
