docs/rst/tutorials/vulcanai/vulcanai_tutorials.rst, before:

.. _tutorials_vulcanai_vulcanai_tutorials:

Vulcanexus VulcanAI
===================

The following VulcanAI tutorial shows how to use most of VulcanAI's features, starting from the basics concepts and gradually increasing in complexity until a complete application is built.
VulcanAI is completely compatible with Vulcanexus and ROS 2 applications, making it a powerful tool to create intelligent robotic systems.

To learn more about VulcanAI, please refer to the :ref:`VulcanAI Overview <vulcanai_introduction>` section.

This tutorial showcases how to use VulcanAI to control a turtlesim robot using natural language commands.

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1

    turtlesim/vulcanai_turtlesim.rst

Quick Demo
----------

A simple demo of the potential of VulcanAI can be found in the following video:

.. raw:: html

      <div class="video-center">
        <video controls playsinline muted loop>
          <source src="../../../_static/resources/tutorials/vulcanai/pentagon.mp4">
        </video>
      </div>

Commit message:

Refs #23739: Add Beta note, figure, minor fixes
Signed-off-by: Carlos Ferreira González <carlosferreira@eprosima.com>

docs/rst/tutorials/vulcanai/vulcanai_tutorials.rst, after:

.. _tutorials_vulcanai_vulcanai_tutorials:

Vulcanexus VulcanAI
===================

.. note::
   VulcanAI is currently in active development, and new features and improvements are being added regularly.
   Current version is in Beta stage.

The following VulcanAI tutorial shows how to use most of VulcanAI's features, starting from the basics concepts and gradually increasing in complexity until a complete application is built.
VulcanAI is completely compatible with Vulcanexus and ROS 2 applications, making it a powerful tool to create intelligent robotic systems.

To learn more about VulcanAI, please refer to the :ref:`VulcanAI Overview <vulcanai_introduction>` section.

This tutorial showcases how to use VulcanAI to control a turtlesim robot using natural language commands.

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1

    turtlesim/vulcanai_turtlesim.rst

.. rubric:: Quick Demo

A simple demo of the potential of VulcanAI can be found in the following video:

.. raw:: html

      <div class="video-center">
        <video controls playsinline muted loop>
          <source src="../../../_static/resources/tutorials/vulcanai/pentagon.mp4">
        </video>
      </div>
