docs/rst/introduction/introduction.rst, before:

.. _vulcanexus_global_introduction:

Vulcanexus Overview
===================

*Vulcanexus*, the *ROS 2* all-in-one tool set, expands the *ROS 2* environment improving the developer experience with *ROS 2* providing open source features and tools not available with the current `ROS 2 release <https://www.ros.org/reps/rep-2000.html#release-schedule>`_.
Consequently, *Vulcanexus* shares the underlying concepts, principles and architecture of :doc:`ROS 2 <../../ros2_documentation/source/index>`.
For more information about *ROS 2* please refer to the `Robot Operating System 2: Design, architecture, and uses in the wild <https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/scirobotics.abm6074>`_ [#]_.
This section will follow and summarize the most important points contained in this paper, pointing out the differences and improvements that *Vulcanexus* provides.

Scope
-----

*ROS 2* provides a software ecosystem to develop robotics applications (or also known as a Software Development Kit or SDK).
It is not an Operating System (OS) in the traditional sense, but a framework that provides a huge range of libraries and tools intended to ease development for a wide variety of devices using several different technologies by providing a unified set of APIs and conventions.
The main categories within this ecosystem are:

Middleware
^^^^^^^^^^

The middleware layer is charged with the communication between components.
After considering several communication protocols the `Object Management Group (OMG) <https://www.omg.org/>`_ `DDS (Data Distribution Service) <https://www.omg.org/spec/DDS/About-DDS/>`_ protocol was selected for being an open standard with a security extension, having a distributed dynamic discovery and being highly customizable for every kind of application.
Several DDS vendors, both open source and licensed, are available within the *ROS 2* environment.
However, *Vulcanexus* supports :ref:`eProsima's Fast DDS <vulcanexus_fastdds>` open source implementation.
The main advantage being that *Vulcanexus* releases are not tied to a specific *Fast DDS* version which is enforced by the `ROS 2 ROS Enhancement Proposal (REP) 2004 <https://ros.org/reps/rep-2004.html#package-requirements>`_ 1.vi. requirement:

    *Must have a policy that keeps API and ABI stability within a released ROS distribution.*

Consequently, only patch releases that fix bugs without modifying API and ABI are considered for updates in the *ROS 2* environment.
*Vulcanexus*, on the other hand, updates the middleware layer any time *eProsima Fast DDS* releases a new version in order to benefit from the latest features and fixes.
*Vulcanexus* takes charge of releasing a new binary stable distribution that is compatible with the potential ABI breaks so the *Vulcanexus* user has only to update its *Vulcanexus* distro to benefit from the latest *Fast DDS* release.
For instance, *Vulcanexus* provides :ref:`PKCS #11 security support <tutorials_security_pkcs11_pkcs11>` whereas *ROS 2* does not support it (as of January 2023).

Algorithms
^^^^^^^^^^

Another category includes robotic application's algorithms.
*Vulcanexus*, being a *ROS 2* all-in-one tool set, provides the algorithms included in *ROS 2* ecosystem.

Developer Tools
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

*ROS 2* provides several development tools for debugging, logging, visualization, introspection, simulation, etc.
*Vulcanexus* adds to *ROS 2* toolset the following tools:

- :ref:`ROS 2 Monitor <vulcanexus_monitor>`: graphical desktop application to monitor *ROS 2* communications.
- :ref:`Fast DDS Statistics Backend <fastdds_statistics_backend>`: *ROS 2 Monitor*'s backend. Can be leveraged with other monitoring frontend applications (e.g. :ref:`Prometheus <tutorials_tools_prometheus>`).
- :ref:`ROS 2 Shapes Demo <vulcanexus_shapes_demo>`: first demo application to understand the most used *ROS 2* Quality of Service (QoS) and test DDS and *ROS 2* communication.
- :ref:`ROS 2 Router <vulcanexus_router>`: end-user software application enabling the connection of distributed *ROS 2* environments.
- :ref:`Webots <webots>`: open-source three-dimensional mobile robot simulator.

.. note::

    This documentation provides several :ref:`tutorials <tutorials_core_ros2_tutorials>` showcasing the capabilities and advantages of *Vulcanexus*.

ROS 2 Architecture
------------------

*ROS 2* architecture is based on several abstraction layers.
Developers usually interact exclusively with the client libraries, which expose the core communication APIs.
Each one developed in a specific programming language to leave users freedom to choose the one that best applies to its application.
Below, a common interface, ``rcl``, connects with the ROS MiddleWare (RMW) layer where the essential communication APIs are defined.
Each DDS vendor provides its specific RMW implementation using their own DDS library.
*Vulcanexus*, supporting *eProsima Fast DDS*, constantly updates the ``rmw_fastrtps`` library (Fast DDS previously was know as Fast-RTPS) in order to provide the latest features included in Fast DDS library to the *Vulcanexus* community, instead of having to wait to the next *ROS 2* release.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/intro/vulcanexus_architecture.svg
    :align: center

For more information about *ROS 2*, the user is encouraged to read *ROS 2* documentation which is included within *Vulcanexus* documentation in the following section, especially the :doc:`Concepts <../../ros2_documentation/source/Concepts>` chapter.

.. [#] S. Macenski, T. Foote, B. Gerkey, C. Lalancette and W. Woodall, "Robot Operating System 2: Design, architecture, and uses in the wild", Science Robotics vol. 7, May 2022

Commit message:

Include Record & Replay, and Spy in tools package sections (#157)
* Refs #19989: Include Record & Replay, and Spy in tools package sections

Signed-off-by: JesusPoderoso <jesuspoderoso@eprosima.com>

* Refs #19989: Apply rev suggestions

Signed-off-by: JesusPoderoso <jesuspoderoso@eprosima.com>

---------

Signed-off-by: JesusPoderoso <jesuspoderoso@eprosima.com>
(cherry picked from commit bfcd3bdeb7920f1f3ef7bfa096efb0f0fb499aec)

docs/rst/introduction/introduction.rst, after:

.. _vulcanexus_global_introduction:

Vulcanexus Overview
===================

*Vulcanexus*, the *ROS 2* all-in-one tool set, expands the *ROS 2* environment improving the developer experience with *ROS 2* providing open source features and tools not available with the current `ROS 2 release <https://www.ros.org/reps/rep-2000.html#release-schedule>`_.
Consequently, *Vulcanexus* shares the underlying concepts, principles and architecture of :doc:`ROS 2 <../../ros2_documentation/source/index>`.
For more information about *ROS 2* please refer to the `Robot Operating System 2: Design, architecture, and uses in the wild <https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/scirobotics.abm6074>`_ [#]_.
This section will follow and summarize the most important points contained in this paper, pointing out the differences and improvements that *Vulcanexus* provides.

Scope
-----

*ROS 2* provides a software ecosystem to develop robotics applications (or also known as a Software Development Kit or SDK).
It is not an Operating System (OS) in the traditional sense, but a framework that provides a huge range of libraries and tools intended to ease development for a wide variety of devices using several different technologies by providing a unified set of APIs and conventions.
The main categories within this ecosystem are:

Middleware
^^^^^^^^^^

The middleware layer is charged with the communication between components.
After considering several communication protocols the `Object Management Group (OMG) <https://www.omg.org/>`_ `DDS (Data Distribution Service) <https://www.omg.org/spec/DDS/About-DDS/>`_ protocol was selected for being an open standard with a security extension, having a distributed dynamic discovery and being highly customizable for every kind of application.
Several DDS vendors, both open source and licensed, are available within the *ROS 2* environment.
However, *Vulcanexus* supports :ref:`eProsima's Fast DDS <vulcanexus_fastdds>` open source implementation.
The main advantage being that *Vulcanexus* releases are not tied to a specific *Fast DDS* version which is enforced by the `ROS 2 ROS Enhancement Proposal (REP) 2004 <https://ros.org/reps/rep-2004.html#package-requirements>`_ 1.vi. requirement:

    *Must have a policy that keeps API and ABI stability within a released ROS distribution.*

Consequently, only patch releases that fix bugs without modifying API and ABI are considered for updates in the *ROS 2* environment.
*Vulcanexus*, on the other hand, updates the middleware layer any time *eProsima Fast DDS* releases a new version in order to benefit from the latest features and fixes.
*Vulcanexus* takes charge of releasing a new binary stable distribution that is compatible with the potential ABI breaks so the *Vulcanexus* user has only to update its *Vulcanexus* distro to benefit from the latest *Fast DDS* release.
For instance, *Vulcanexus* provides :ref:`PKCS #11 security support <tutorials_security_pkcs11_pkcs11>` whereas *ROS 2* does not support it (as of January 2023).

Algorithms
^^^^^^^^^^

Another category includes robotic application's algorithms.
*Vulcanexus*, being a *ROS 2* all-in-one tool set, provides the algorithms included in *ROS 2* ecosystem.

Developer Tools
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

*ROS 2* provides several development tools for debugging, logging, visualization, introspection, simulation, etc.
*Vulcanexus* adds to *ROS 2* toolset the following tools:

- :ref:`ROS 2 Monitor <vulcanexus_monitor>`: graphical desktop application to monitor *ROS 2* communications.
- :ref:`Fast DDS Statistics Backend <fastdds_statistics_backend>`: *ROS 2 Monitor*'s backend. Can be leveraged with other monitoring frontend applications (e.g. :ref:`Prometheus <tutorials_tools_prometheus>`).
- :ref:`ROS 2 Shapes Demo <vulcanexus_shapes_demo>`: first demo application to understand the most used *ROS 2* Quality of Service (QoS) and test DDS and *ROS 2* communication.
- :ref:`ROS 2 Router <vulcanexus_router>`: end-user software application enabling the connection of distributed *ROS 2* environments.
- :ref:`ROS 2 Record & Replay <vulcanexus_recordreplay>`: end-user software applications that efficiently save messages published in a *ROS 2* environment and playback these messages in the order in which they were recorded.
- :ref:`Fast DDS Spy <vulcanexus_fastddsspy>`: CLI interactive tool that allows the introspection of a *ROS 2* environment in a human readable format.
- :ref:`ROS 2 QoS Profiles Manager <vulcanexus_qos_profiles_manager>`: tool suite to generate XML configuration files for Vulcanexus middleware Fast DDS.
- :ref:`Webots <webots>`: open-source three-dimensional mobile robot simulator.

.. note::

    This documentation provides several :ref:`tutorials <tutorials_core_ros2_tutorials>` showcasing the capabilities and advantages of *Vulcanexus*.

ROS 2 Architecture
------------------

*ROS 2* architecture is based on several abstraction layers.
Developers usually interact exclusively with the client libraries, which expose the core communication APIs.
Each one developed in a specific programming language to leave users freedom to choose the one that best applies to its application.
Below, a common interface, ``rcl``, connects with the ROS MiddleWare (RMW) layer where the essential communication APIs are defined.
Each DDS vendor provides its specific RMW implementation using their own DDS library.
*Vulcanexus*, supporting *eProsima Fast DDS*, constantly updates the ``rmw_fastrtps`` library (Fast DDS previously was know as Fast-RTPS) in order to provide the latest features included in Fast DDS library to the *Vulcanexus* community, instead of having to wait to the next *ROS 2* release.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/intro/vulcanexus_architecture.svg
    :align: center

For more information about *ROS 2*, the user is encouraged to read *ROS 2* documentation which is included within *Vulcanexus* documentation in the following section, especially the :doc:`Concepts <../../ros2_documentation/source/Concepts>` chapter.

.. [#] S. Macenski, T. Foote, B. Gerkey, C. Lalancette and W. Woodall, "Robot Operating System 2: Design, architecture, and uses in the wild", Science Robotics vol. 7, May 2022
